Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Carper, and distinguished Members of the
Committee: it is a privilege for me to appear before you today to discuss the effects our country’s
insatiable demand for drugs has on our border, our neighborhoods and communities, the heroic
men and women of law enforcement, and on the individuals and their families devastated by the
scourge of illegal drug use. You have also asked for my views as the former commander of
United States Southern Command (USSOUTHCOM) on the Trans-National Criminal
Organizations (TCO) and the illegal networks they manage, and how the production and
smuggling of drugs through various countries adversely impacts these societies. Finally, you
wanted my thoughts on what Washington—but infinitely more important what we as a society
can do to reduce the demand for drugs in the U.S.
To frame my remarks I think it is important for the Committee to know two things about
me. First, that until mid-January this year I commanded the men and women of SOUTHCOM
one of the six geographical combatant commands. The Area of Responsivity of that Miami
based headquarters includes all of the countries and principalities south of the U.S., with the
notable exceptions of Mexico, the Bahamas, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. You can
be confident that what I’ve submitted in my written statement, and my answers to any questions
you may ask, will be accurate and the truth as I know it. The responses will not be coming from
another recently retired general who is now telling all. I have said all of these things, and made
all of these points, endlessly in innumerable official meetings in Washington, Brasilia, Bogota,
Lima, Tegucigalpa, Guatemala City, indeed throughout the region, and in all of my open and
closed congressional office calls and hearings, and to the press, during my 39 months in
command of USSOUTHCOM.
________________
It is very important for you to fully recognize that from this region of the world—our
own neighborhood, that effectively 100% of the heroin and cocaine, and perhaps 90% of the
methamphetamines that plague our fellow citizens—poor and rich, working class and middle
class, black and white—are produced and trafficked. This region, particularly from Mexico, is
also the source of enormous quantities of pirated pharmaceuticals. The illicit production and
transport of these pharmaceuticals took off as a growth industry for the TCOs beginning not so
many years ago when the combination of legislation from this body and the aggressive actions
on the part of U.S. law enforcement, particularly the FBI, effectively targeted unprincipled and
criminal medical practitioners in the U.S. These individuals in the business of writing illegal
prescriptions for extremely addictive and routinely abused painkillers like oxycodone and
percocet created an illicit industry likely worthy billions in its heyday. As this illicit trade was
increasingly choked off in the U.S. the cartels, international businessmen as they are, recognized
the demand and filled the demand including the production, trafficking and distribution into the
U.S. Regardless of where they are produced these pharmaceuticals are still relatively expensive
and increasingly hard to come by, which then increased the demand for very cheap, very
addictive, and readily available heroin. Of course the cartels then responded to this demand and
so the business of meeting our drug demands goes on. Simply put, then, Mexico is the source of
heroin and meth—and this includes the growing and harvesting of nearly 40,000 acres of poppies
(DEA estimates) and the labs to produce industrial quantities of both drugs using precursor
chemicals imported in bulk from Asia.
Cocaine bound for the U.S. market, on the other hand, is grown, manufactured and sent
north along the network comes primarily from Colombia. Unknown to many, Colombia is our
very best ally in the region across a range of regional and international issues, and a country with


________________
whom the U.S. has a decades long and very strong “special relationship” as specifically
acknowledged recently by President Obama when introducing Colombian President Santos here
in Washington. Colombia does more to help solve our demand problem than do we. For years
they have eradicated 40,000 acres of coca annually, destroyed thousands of labs, and just last
year seized nearly 200 metric tons of cocaine before it ever left their country. They have done
this selflessly and at an incredibly high cost in the blood of their military and police
professionals. We have helped them in this decades long effort particularly in the area of
information and intelligence sharing, and encouragement. What they have done internally
dealing with the terrorist group they have been battling for over 50 years, and in the fight against
cocaine trafficking over the last 25 years working with the U.S. as an equal partner under “Plan
Columbia,” is nothing less than miraculous.
Mr. Chairman I think the Committee knows this, and if it does not it should, Colombia is
an exporter of security to the rest of the region. The relationship is a terrific example of how
sustained U.S. support based on mutual respect and equal partnership can help a people gain
control of their security situation, strengthen government institutions, eradicate corruption, and
bolster their economy. As I have mentioned Colombia’s turnaround is nothing short of
astonishing, and today it is a leader among many strong partners to improve stability in the
Western Hemisphere. Mr. Chairman, I am confident you and the Committee know that the
United States has a special relationship with only a handful of countries. These relationships are
based on a firm foundation of trust and are with nations that value the same things we do—
family and opportunity for our children, a free press, democracy and rule of law, safe streets,
respect for human rights—and we rely on partnerships with such countries to work with us in


________________
achieving regional stability, countries that we look to for international involvement and
leadership, countries that we consider our strongest friends and most steadfast allies.
Colombia unquestionably plays that role in Latin America, but also in parts of Africa, the
Middle East, on UN missions and other commitments including dispatching one of their frigates
to join the international effort to counter-piracy on the high seas in the vicinity of Somalia and
Yemen. Closer to home, and through the “U.S. - Colombia Action Plan on Regional Security,”
Colombia provides vital assistance to its Central American, Caribbean and Mexican neighbors in
the fight against criminal networks. They are vitally important in this endeavor because the U.S.
military given all of the demands in other more violent or potentially more violent reaches of the
world, is unavailable for this critical duty in the Western Hemisphere. And I want to note here
that every aspect of U.S. collaboration under this Plan, including activities conducted by
Southern Command, is facilitated through U.S. security assistance and governed by the same
U.S. laws and regulations—especially those requiring the human rights vetting of units—
regulating the activities of our own military personnel. Colombia is also the example to every
other nation in the region that stares into the bottomless abyss of failed statehood. Colombia
once stared into this same darkness, an abyss due largely to the activities of the region’s “narco-
terrorist” organizations responding to the demand for drugs in the United States, but they
changed everything and won. They changed their laws, their tax code, their business
environment, their approach to counterinsurgency and counterterrorism operations, their
approach to democracy and human rights—and they won.
The vast majority of the tonnage of all four of these drugs—heroin, meth, cocaine, and
pharmaceuticals—are then trafficked by the Trans-National Criminal Organizations via the
Central American - Mexican criminal network(s) directly into the U.S. This network-of-


________________
networks, by the way, is generally controlled by the Mexican cartels with many subcontractors
interspersed throughout the region and the world for that matter. The enterprise begins in the
jungles of Colombia, runs along the Central American transit vector, into Mexico. Once in
Mexico so effective are the cartels in taking advantage of the laws, corruption and intimidation,
of that country and our own, their illicit cargo—drugs, people or anything else that can pay to
ride the network—can already be considered to be in Madison, Wilmington, Phoenix, Columbus,
Billings, Cheyenne, Boston, and Manchester. The distribution networks reach deep inside every
U.S. city, small town, rural community and neighborhood. The men and women involved in this
enterprise are among the most cruel and violent on the planet, are unencumbered by morals, laws
or regulations, other than to maximize profits. They do not check passports, inspect bags,
conduct body scans, or test for explosive residue. Anything and anybody can travel on this
network so long as the price can be met, and, frankly, the fare is very reasonable considering.
As an aside, Peru with whom we have very good relations in the military, law
enforcement and political realms, and Bolivia who we do not, are the first and second largest
producers of cocaine in the world—which is the big profit maker. The production from these
two nations feed the world market carried by equally efficient and violent networks that flow
west across the Pacific, and east through Brazil and increasingly through Paraguay, Uruguay and
Argentina to Africa, Europe and the Middle East. And with trafficking eventually comes
consumption. For example, the U.S. is the #1 consumer of cocaine in the world. Brazil, until a
few years ago was not a consumer nation at all, but once the network was established it is only a
matter of time until the cartels and network “managers” develop a market until today with Brazil
achieving the dubious status of being the #2 consumer in the world. The Paraguayans, the
Argentines, indeed any transit country will quickly experience the same phenomenon.


________________
Members of the Committee, much like Colombia was able to accomplish over the last 15
years our friends across the region are committed to winning back their streets, indeed their
countries, from criminal gangs and drug traffickers, and doing so while protecting human rights.
The Hondurans, Guatemalans, El Salvadorans, Jamaicans, Dominicans, they are all ready and
willing to partner with the United States. They are eager for expanded cooperation and increased
learning and training opportunities with the U.S. military and law enforcement. But they are
very frustrated by what they perceive as the low prioritization of Latin America and the
Caribbean on our national security and foreign policy agendas, which is especially puzzling
given the shared challenges of transnational organized crime and narco-terrorism. They are also
frustrated in the current approach the U.S. is taking towards drugs as we move forward towards
outright legalization or de facto legalization by expanding the “medical” use of drugs like
marijuana. They also cringe when Americans in any capacity or role make the case that
“recreational” use of drugs is “harmless,” or that the vast majority of drug dealing on our streets
is non-violent. All this, while we continue to encourage and often times criticize our friends to
the south for not doing what we think is enough to reduce production, or impede the transport of
these killer substances though their national territories to the U.S.
In the world in which they live—the Mexicans, Central Americans, Colombians,
Peruvians, and across the Caribbean including Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands—in their world
there is no such thing as a “non-violent” drug deal as thousands die annually in their countries as
a result of the business of supplying drugs to the American market. Good, decent and honest
police officers and soldiers, judges and prosecutors, legislators and journalists, officials from the
various ministries—and their wives, children, mothers and fathers, their entire families—are
intimidated, corrupted or killed so that Americans can get high on weekends or spend their time


________________
“Chasing the Dragon” of addiction. The word “hypocrisy” often times comes up when one
speaks with our friends to the south because we do little, certainly in their view, to reduce the
demand.
If it is not obvious as this point, I will cut to the bottom line and tell you that the
fundamental factor that drives the entire illicit enterprise is our country’s demand for heroin,
methamphetamines, cocaine, and opiates in pill form. I do not even include marijuana and the
many synthetic offshoots which in and of itself is a major factor in so many social ills. It is in
fact a “gateway drug” to more destructive illegal drug use, and its use results in a great many
destructive physical effects on the brain, the user’s health, and social development. Many
hoping to cash in on the emerging commercial enterprise that is legal or medical marijuana work
hard to discount or deny these facts, but they are facts. It is at the same time ludicrous and
inconceivable to me why with all the Americas already struggling with drug and alcohol
addiction that we would make available even more substances to poison the body and confuse
the brain. To make the powerful modern-day drug that is marijuana available on demand and
compound the problem.
Mr. Chairman, it is a fool’s position to think that the tax revenue raised by legal sales will
offset the physical and social costs of its use. Indications and warnings are already coming in
from those states that have legalized the drug or allowed widespread “medical” use and abuse,
but something to consider is what the DEA would tell you and that is for every dollar raised from
two drugs already legal—tobacco and alcohol—amounts approaching 23 and 17 dollars
respectively are paid out by the already overburdened taxpayer to deal with the effects of these
two drugs. If those public officials voting to legalize pot either by outright legalization, or via
the dispensing of medical marijuana, were responsible they would most certainly, and


________________
responsibly, consider the additional burden that it will have on the tax payer and add additional
tax by say 17x onto the price of the drug at the counter.
Our drug demand, including marijuana, to a large degree has wrought devastating
consequences in many of our partner nations, degrading their civilian police and justice systems,
corrupting their institutions, and contributing to a breakdown in citizen safety. The tentacles of
global networks involved in narcotics and arms trafficking, human smuggling (including the
18,000 young women and boys the UN tells us are smuggled into the U.S. every year to serve as
sex slaves) , illicit finance, and other types of illegal activity reach across Latin America and the
Caribbean and into the United States, yet we continue to almost ignore the threat TCOs present
to our homeland and the significant and direct risk to our national security and that of our partner
nations. Unless confronted by an immediate, visible, or uncomfortable crisis, our nation’s
tendency is to take these threats that ride the networks into and through the Western Hemisphere
for granted or hope for the best. I believe this is a huge mistake. I believe hope was and is the
same approach the Europeans in general, and the French and Belgians specifically, took
regarding their borders—and they lost.
In 2014 estimates there were nearly half a million migrants from Central America and
Mexico—including over 50,000 unaccompanied children (UAC) and families—were
apprehended on our border, many fleeing violence, poverty, and the spreading influence of
criminal networks and gangs. Assistant Secretary of State Roberta Jacobson testified that the
“UAC migration serves as a warning sign that the serious and longstanding challenges in Central




________________
America are worsening.” In my opinion, the relative ease with which human smugglers moved
tens of thousands of people along the networks also serves as another warning sign: these
smuggling routes are a potential vulnerability to our homeland. As I stated many times in open
hearings to the House and Senate defense committees, terrorist organizations could easily
leverage those same smuggling routes to move operatives or materiel with intent to cause grave
harm to our citizens. Mr. Chairman, Members, addressing the root causes of insecurity and
instability is not just in the region’s interests, but ours as well. This is why responsible public
officials never surrender in the effort to highlight the threat and support the Congress’ and
administration’s commitment to increase assistance to Central America, Colombia and other
partners in the region—help which should be viewed as an investment and not foreign aid.
These and other challenges underscore the enduring importance of protecting the
southern approaches to the U.S., and this cannot—should not—be attempted as an endless series
of “goal-line stands” on the one-foot line at the official ports-of-entry or along the thousands of
miles of border between this country and Mexico. The men and women of the Department of
Homeland Security and local law enforcement that work that border are highly skilled and
incredibly dedicated, but overwhelmed. They are overwhelmed by the efficiency of the network
and the funding the cartels have to guarantee their illicit products and people will get through.
The effort to get at our drug demand begins, or should begin, on the cartel’s end of the field and
with a much greater effort. The U.S. military is almost absent in the effort due to an almost total
lack of naval forces, although the Commandant of the Coast Guard, Admiral Paul Zukunft
USCG, seeing the dire need immediately upon assuming his current duties increased the number


________________
of cutters and personnel committed to the effort. The Coast Guard’s cupboard is nearly bare,
however, given all the commitments the men and women of that organization are required to
address in the waters surrounding the United States with an insufficient number of National
Security Cutters and other vessels to do what they need to do globally. Our Coast Guard has
more demands on it than it can address, but try they do and they are amazing.
The incredibly strong partnerships I enjoyed as the SOUTHCOM commander with the
U.S. interagency—especially with the Department of Homeland Security, the Coast Guard,
DEA, FBI, ATF, the intelligence community and the Departments of Treasury and State all fused
together by the Joint Inter-Agency Task Force-South (JIATF South) in Key West —were and are
fundamental to the efforts to try and safeguard the southern defense of the U.S. homeland from.
If you want a report card on how effectively the interagency is accomplishing the mission, how
the effort to prevent malign cargo and illegal migrants from entering the country is going, I will
let you draw your own conclusions. I will say, however, that even though we are so incredibly
fortunate to have willing partners like Colombia, Chile, Brazil, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, and Panama, and remarkable interagency cooperation, it’s the demand...it’s always
about the demand.
Domestic Impact
Americans have been consuming hard drugs in immense quantities certainly since the
mid-1960s when the use of drugs became literally cool as projected by Hollywood, social
“progressives,” and even Harvard professors. Since then it has ebbed and flowed—although
mostly flowed—over the years, but regardless of what the immediate use trends were along the
timeline it has always been a constant in the inner city and working class neighborhoods of our
cities. The epidemic we talk about and are so rightly concerned with today is due in very large


________________
measure because the addiction, and the associated violent crime and deaths due to overdose, are
no longer a problem of our minority and working class neighborhoods. The death and crime has
exploded into the suburbs. The body count is now conducted on Capitol Hill and in Georgetown,
on Beacon Hill and the ivy league and Stanford campuses, and not just in the urban areas of our
great cities.
Until the last few years the number of our citizens dying from the use of hard drugs
trafficked into the United States from abroad by narco-terrorist transnational criminal syndicates,
or acquired through illegal prescriptions, hovered around 40,000 annually. To put it another way
since 9/11 when 3,000 were killed by another form of terrorism, over 560,000 have been in my
view murdered by narco-terrorists. In the past few years even the outrageous number of 40,000
began to spike until last year the number went beyond 46,000. The DEA tells us that in 2013
there were 8,620 heroin deaths due to overdose. These deaths are increasing everyday across the
land but particularly in states in the Middle Atlantic, New England and the Midwest. In fact the
Center for Disease Control puts the number at 44 a day or over 16,000 a year. To put a more
focused face on this growing tragedy, in 2014 the New Hampshire Office of the Chief Medical
Examiner predicted more than 400 deaths from heroin overdoses in 2015 which would have been
more than double the amount that small state of only 1.3 million experienced in 2013. He was
wrong. It was higher. Senator Ayotte among others in this body has been a champion of raising
the awareness of the issue not only in her own state, but nationally, but in my view it has in many
ways fallen on deaf ears as solving this problem will be hard, really hard, maybe too hard—but I
think it is worth trying.
Other impacts on our society are obvious even to the numb. Law enforcement figures tell
us that a very-large percentage of individuals arrested for major crimes—including homicide,


________________
theft and assault—are under the influence of illicit drugs. The same sources tell us that 93% of
those abusers believe they do not need help even while they are committing violent crimes or
selling their bodies to feed their habits, in and out of rehab, or saved multiple times when they
are found in the gutters and “crack houses” by police officers and first responders. Most of these
abusers started with the gateway drug that marijuana most certainly is, and even while abusing
heroin are also routinely using at least one other drug. And the dollar cost is immense with the
estimate at over $200B to deal with drug abuse; much of it on rehabilitation that most agree is at
best marginally effective even over the short term.
Security Environment
As stated in the introduction the end results of decades of rampant demand for drugs in
the U.S.—and even if we do not care what it is doing to our own society—has caused the spread
of criminal organizations that continue to tear at the social, economic, and security fabric of our
Mexican, Latin American and Caribbean neighbors. Powerful and well-resourced, these TCOs
traffic in drugs—including cocaine, heroin, marijuana, counterfeit pharmaceuticals, and
methamphetamine—but have evolved grown in size and sophistication. They have also
broadened the services and products they provide. The cartels and networks now largely control
the sale and movement of small arms and explosives, precursor chemicals for use in producing
industrial quantities of heroin and meth, illegally mined gold which is unbelievably destructive to
fragile environments, counterfeit goods, people, and other contraband. They engage in pervasive
money laundering, bribery, intimidation, and assassinations at every level of society from the cop
on the street to the president of a country. They threaten the very underpinnings of democracy
itself: citizen safety, rule of law, and economic prosperity. They have turned particularly Central
America and Mexico into among the most dangerous nations on earth by UN numbers of deaths


________________
per 100,000 citizens. They have had the very same impact on our own Puerto Rico and the
Americans who reside there. And these criminal cartels pose a direct threat to the stability of our
partners and an insidious risk to the security of our nation. If these groups were motivated
politically to destroy these countries and bring down these governments by violence we would
label them insurgents and lend appropriate support, as we have in Colombia and Peru, to help
them fight the narco-terrorist organizations that are The Shining Path and FARC. But because
they are motivated by crime and profit, and not aggressive politics or extremist ideology, and
despite the fact that are directly and indirectly killing 40,000+ of our citizens every year, many in
our government hide make the case that this is law enforcement as opposed to a military
problem. I can assure you it is both and the partner nations at risk have no choice but to re-train
their military units for internal police duties.
While there is growing recognition of the danger posed by transnational organized crime,
it is often eclipsed by other concerns. Frankly, Mr. Chairman, I believe we are overlooking a
significant security threat. Despite the very effective efforts of the men and women of law
enforcement, TCOs are constantly adapting their methods for trafficking anything and
everything, and anybody, across our border. While there is not yet any indication that the
criminal networks involved in human and drug trafficking are interested in supporting the efforts
of terrorist groups, these networks could unwittingly right now facilitate the movement of
terrorist operatives or weapons of mass destruction toward our borders, potentially undetected
and almost completely unrestricted. In addition to thousands of Central Americans fleeing
poverty and violence, foreign nationals from countries like Somalia, Bangladesh, Lebanon, and


________________
Pakistan are using the region’s human smuggling networks to enter the United States.3 While
many are merely seeking economic opportunity or fleeing a “narco-insurgency” that we have
largely created, a subset could potentially be seeking to do us grave harm. Thankfully, we have
not observed any hard evidence of this occurring...yet. That said, however, as was the case in
Boston, or San Bernardino, or Paris or Brussels—and despite the best efforts of our overworked
and underappreciated intelligence professionals most notably the CIA, DIA and NSA, and our
embattled law enforcement including the FBI, ATF, CBP and Border Patrol, and the uniformed
officers on the street—we often learn that the terrorists are here only when the bomb goes off
and the body count has begun. I am deeply concerned, and you should be deeply concerned as
our elected leaders, that smuggling networks are a vulnerability that terrorists could seek to
exploit. I do not see it as a maybe, but as a when.
You should also be troubled by the financial and operational overlap between criminal
and terrorist networks in the region. Although the extent of criminal-terrorist cooperation is
unclear, what is clear is that terrorists and militant organizations easily tap into the international
illicit marketplace to underwrite their activities and obtain arms and funding to conduct
operations.
It’s easy to see why: illicit trafficking is estimated to be a $650 billion industry
worldwide—larger than the GDP of all but 20 countries in the world—and less than one percent
of global illicit financial flows is seized or frozen.
It is estimated that the profits from cocaine
sales alone in the U.S. go beyond $80B. Indeed, the biggest problem the narco-terrorists have is
not getting drugs into the U.S., but laundering the immense profits from the enterprise. The


________________
terrorist group Lebanese Hezbollah—which has long viewed the region as a potential attack
venue against Israeli or other Western targets—has supporters and sympathizers in Lebanese
diaspora communities in Latin America, some of whom are involved in lucrative illicit activities
like money laundering and trafficking in counterfeit goods and drugs. These clan-based criminal
networks exploit corruption and lax law enforcement in places like the Tri-Border Area of
Brazil, Paraguay, and Argentina and the Colon Free Trade Zone in Panama and generate
revenue, an unknown amount of which is transferred to Lebanese Hezbollah. Unfortunately, our
limited intelligence capabilities focused on this accumulation of funding make it difficult to fully
assess the amount of terrorist financing generated in Latin America, or understand the scope of
possible criminal-terrorist collaboration in this region of immense-illicit funding.
Demand Reduction
As a nation we cannot interdict, or shoot, or convict, or rehabilitate our way out of this
hell. It will take all of these approaches and more to solve the problem and significantly reduce
drug abuse. If U.S. drug demand is a large part of the problem, then reducing that demand is
essential to getting our arms not only around the problems in our own country, but also the
problem our demand cause our partner nations and the support it gives to terrorism. Demand
reduction is to say the least a multi–faceted challenge. It begins in the coca or poppy fields
hundreds of miles south of our border with Colombian soldiers killed by IEDs, and the families
of Mexican Marines murdered in retaliation for their efforts in our drug fight. It ends in the U.S.
in a rehab clinic somewhere inside our country.
But we know how to do this. We know how to design a campaign to save lives and
significantly reduce a social cancer. When I was in grade school the Center for Disease Control


________________
informs us that roughly 70% percent of Americans smoked cigarettes. A pack was maybe .30
cents. At nine or ten years old I would routinely walk down to the corner store and buy a pack of
Chesterfields for my mother or Camels for my father. Lung cancer was off the chart. Today the
CDC estimates that less than 20% of Americans smoke. This unbelievable behavior
modification was accomplished first and foremost by an effective and never ending campaign to
make Americans wake up to what smoking does to the body, then by raising the price per pack
so that it is out of the reach of most intelligent Americans, insurance premiums went up if you
smoked, the legal age to purchase was fixed at 18 and is now going to 21 in many states, and by
severely limiting where one can light up and essentially making smokers outcasts. It worked.
We also did it to battle and significantly reduce drinking-and-driving saving hundreds of
thousands of lives and significantly reducing serious injury due to automobile accidents. The
very same applies to seat belt use. Forty 40 years ago no one “buckled up,” today only the most
irresponsible among us would even start an automobile without first fastening their kids in, then
themselves. The same applies to car seats for infants and small children, helmets for young
bikers, and even to reducing littering along our streets and highways. The success of these
campaigns was not only law enforcement, although law enforcements and penalties were without
question part of the solution. As in the case of auto deaths and injury, the success came as a
result of a comprehensive and an unrelenting campaign of educating our citizens across every
age group focusing on children and young adults in school, new drivers and their parents, and the
older generations who until the campaigns were unleashed in the early 1980s just assumed that
the carnage our society was experiencing on the highways was simply the price required of a
motorized society. But it wasn’t.


________________
Hollywood got behind the effort, as did responsible politicians and civic officials. No
elected official in his or her right mind opposed it even with intense lobbying efforts by Detroit
first against installing seat belts then over mandatory air bags, and certainly did not try to
rationalize the problem away and raise tax revenue from it. Everyone got on board—and it
worked. Anyone under the age of say 40 today simply cannot imagine a time when we did
things differently, when we did not have seat belts and air bags, but there was a time we did. As
with the campaign today to raise awareness of climate change—whether one agrees of disagrees
with the cause and effect claims—all are at least fully aware of the issue. Even those who reject
the science have reduced their energy consumption and know it is good for the environment. We
know how to do this, and it is the only way to not only reduce the cost and misery to our own
people, but also to the nations to our south who suffer so from our demand. We will never get to
zero, but perhaps we can reduce the abuse of drugs by over 50% as we did with nicotine, and
save tens-of-thousands of our citizens as we did when we protected them in their automobiles.
And just as importantly reduce the profits available to the criminal and terrorist networks.
I will close with a few final thoughts. The first is that we must keep the pressure on the
cartels and destroy their crops before they are harvested, destroy their production facilities
wherever they are, and break up the networks by arrest and prosecution. We must also combine
these often times kinetic efforts with locating the financial institutions that knowingly or
unknowingly support the financial aspect of drug trafficking—and seize their billions. Second, I
want to highlight the efforts of my very good friend Mike Botticelli, the Director of National
Drug Control Policy, who quite rightly tells us that with addiction we are really dealing with a
disease and we should be focused on saving and rehabilitating those unfortunate to suffer the
disease, and not just jailing them even for petty crimes. At the same time we must understand


________________
that the overwhelming number of men and women involved in the production, transport, and
distribution of these drugs are in it for the money and must be hunted down. We must also
acknowledge that regardless of the disease, if serious crimes are committed we cannot turn a
blind eye to the act just because the perpetrator is sick. But even while holding him or her
accountable, and while punishing them, we should as a society still try to them well. Thirdly, we
must develop a national campaign that appeals to the intelligence, or the good nature, or the love
of humanity, or paranoia, or social responsibility, or pocket book, or fear of persecution, or
whatever—it does not matter—so long as we have an effective program that significantly
reduces demand. There are individual efforts out there in American society but they are
uncoordinated and go unheralded. The Boy Scouts, the Young Marine Program, Drug Free
America Foundation, and dozens of other efforts in our communities but they are individual
points of light when what we need are floodlights.
Of note I want to alert the Committee to a combined effort by the Director of the FBI,
Jim Comey, and the DEA Administrator, Chuck Rosenberg. The effort, entitled, “Chasing the
Dragon,” is one that seeks to distribute a CD and study guide to 100,000 grade school, middle
school, and high school teachers “....to reach youth before an addiction can set in.” The CD is
powerful, horrifying, sad, disgusting, depressing, scary, and designed to get some of the most
powerful influencers in our society—teachers—onboard in an effort to ideally prevent, and if not
then to reduce drug use where it typically begins. Both organizations are also offering additional
resources, experts, speakers, anything to help reduce the demand of drugs and the human tragedy
it causes in the lives of millions. I would strongly encourage the Committee to bring in
representatives of the two premier drug fighting organizations in the world and get their


________________
perspective on this critically important topic. I would also encourage all to sign onto the FBI
website at www.FBI.gov/ChasingtheDragon for additional details and perspective.
You might ask yourself, Mr. Chairman, “why is law enforcement and the U.S. military
not only into the business of detecting, monitoring, and interdicting the networks and
organizations that carry drugs and so many other illicit cargoes into the United States, but
increasingly into drug abuse prevention and demand reduction as well”? Many argue it is not
our job, although the nation could take a lesson as to how law and enforcement and the nation’s
Armed Forces have all but set drug free environments within the two organizations. Is it not
prevention and demand reduction the responsibility of our parents? Elected officials?
Government health care providers? But I would submit that when the kind of men and women
that serve in law enforcement, who see firsthand and everyday what drugs do to our children, our
families, our society and to the nation, when these kind of men and women see what it does and
that the effort to do something about it is too weak or non-existent—they act. I would agree that
it might not be their job, but since no one else seems to be doing it as effectively as it could be
done....